#                               Codebreaking Lab                               #
####                           *Dr S. S. Chandra*                           ####

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The deciphering of secret messages in World War II was one of the main drivers
of the computational age we currently live in. Cipher machines developed around
this time were sophisticated enough that breaking the coding system by hand was
no longer feasible.

This lab was designed to allow you to follow in [Alan Turing’s](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing) footsteps as he tackled such
problems, helping building one of the world’s first computational machines, the
[Bombe machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bombe) used to crack the code
generated by the [German Enigma Machine](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine) and later the more general-purpose
electronic computer called the Colossus.

In the first part of the lab, we study the much simpler Caesar cipher used
during Roman times that can be broken by hand, though we shall use computers
instead. In the second part, we will use a pre-built simulator of an Enigma code
machine in Python to crack Enigma coded messages just as the Allies would have
done in World War II. Lastly, we will cover general code breaking tasks for
those looking for a challenge.


## Part I – Caesar Cipher _(5 Marks)_

The Caesar cipher is a simple plain text substitution cipher, where you replace
your message alphabets to the same alphabet but shifted by a constant offset.

> See the starting code provided in `test_caesar.py` and `test_caesar_break.py`

### 1.A `(2 Marks)`
Use [Python dictionaries](https://developers.google.com/edu/python/dict-files)
to create a shifted directory of letters that will allow you to map your letters
to shifted ones, so that you can use the encrypt and decrypt code provided in
`test_caesar.py` to encode and decode Caesar cipher messages. Demonstrate that
your code works for your own custom message by running the encrypt and decrypt
methods within the script provided.

### 1.B `(1 Mark)`
This type of cipher is easily broken by observing that some letters in the
English language occur more often than others, such as the letter ‘e’. Use the
initial code provided in `test_caesar_break.py` to write an algorithm to break
the code and decrypt the message provided.

### 1.C `(2 Marks)`
Extend your script to break any Caesar cipher message of an arbitrary shift if
you haven’t already done so. Test out your code with your neighbour or mate by
exchanging ciphered messages of unknown shifts between yourselves.


## Part II – Enigma Cipher _(8 Marks)_

The [Enigma machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine) was a
commercial electro-mechanical cipher device introduced to the public before
World War II for encrypting communication. It was adopted by the German military
with various enhancements to make it more secure before the war broke out. It
can be seen as the ultimate plain text cipher system that not only incorporates
shifts but also permutations that change for every letter encrypted by using a
combination of rotors. You can find a detailed description of the machine and
its internal workings in (Copeland, 2004) [Enigma, Section 2]. We may also find
the Enigma videos in the [Computation YouTube Playlist](
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLC0kkV5axv-X3JOXeHGoedTMCXGakoYmt)
helpful.

For our purposes however, all we need to know is that the machine maps a letter
to another letter in our alphabet using two main mechanisms. Firstly, there are
three rotors that can be chosen from a set of 5 or 7 distinct rotors. Each rotor
maps an input letter to another output letter with a shift determined by its
rotation rate. All available rotors have different rotation rates and any
combination of three can be chosen to be used within the machine for ciphering.
The result is that the input letter passes through all three rotors to
thoroughly jumble up the shifts to produce the output letter. The starting
positions of the three rotors dictates the rotational offsets of the cipher and
is called the window positions or key. The window positions change as the cipher
is used, so that the initial window positions are required to decrypt messages.
Lastly, there is an override mapping mechanism especially outfitted for the
Germany military called the plugboard. The board allows one to add additional
mappings of individual letters to other letters even before the rotors are
applied.

> See the starting code provided in `test_enigma_simple.py` and
> `test_enigma_break.py`

Shakes the Horrible has decided to purchase a set of Enigma machines to ensure
communication with his armed forces (consisting mainly of Spider Monkeys) is
secure as possible.

### 2.A `(1 Mark)`
Demonstrate a working Enigma machine with the given simple example script.

### 2.B `(1 Mark)`
In his arrogance however, he has decided to force his military to _always_ use
the window positions SSC as those are the initials of his name. He is also a
cheapskate! He hasn’t even bothered to purchase the plug board or any additional
rotors, meaning he only has access to rotors I, II and II.

Decipher Shakes’ message to his military given in the example script using the
Enigma machine simulator.

### 2.C `(3 Marks)`
After realising that his military forces are taking heavy losses, he decides to
take the advice of his generals and allows a different fixed, but hidden window
positions for all further communications. He however still refuses to buy the
plugboard. He does decree though that all messages are to end with the phrase
"Hail Shakes!".

Using the known end phrase, phrases like which are called [cribs](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptanalysis_of_the_Enigma#Crib-based_decryption),
write an algorithm to break Shakes’ new code into the provided script and
decrypt the message provided.

### 2.D `(1 Mark)`
Add a counter to your script to keep track of the number of tries. How many
attempts does it take to crack the code? How long did it take on your computer?
How long do you think it would’ve taken for a computer in the 1940s?!

### 2.E `(2 Marks)`
If Shakes the Horrible wasn’t so ignorant and worried about money, he would have
purchased both the extra 2 rotors and the plugboard. How much longer would have
the cracking his code taken on your computer? An estimate as a number of tries
or minutes/hours is sufficient.


## Part III – Code Breaking _(2 Marks)_

A number of sophisticated encryption schemes can be broken with some simple
prior knowledge of the context in which the message was composed, but without
knowing anything about the encryption scheme or device.

Crack the following message intercepted by the United States navy that was
addressed to a Japanese naval officer in 1941 to reveal its contents. It is
actually doable by hand, but you may use Python as well.

`19 17 17 19 14` `20 23 18 19 8` `12 16 19 8 3` `21 8 25 18 14` `18 6 3 18 8`
`15 18 22 18 11`



## References

- Copeland, B.J., 2004. Essential Turing: Classic Writings on Minds and
     Computers. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
